See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/346732659

Single cell protein: Sources, mechanism of production, nutritional value and
its uses in aquaculture nutrition
Article in Aquaculture · January 2021
DOI: 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2020.735885

CITATIONS

READS

74

8,562

6 authors, including:
Muhammad Sharif

Amjad Islam Aqib

University of Agriculture Faisalabad

Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences- Bahawalpur- Pakistan

25 PUBLICATIONS 176 CITATIONS

114 PUBLICATIONS 544 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Muhammad Saeed
Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences
154 PUBLICATIONS 2,169 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) Pandemic View project

Natural Products in Poultry View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Muhammad Saeed on 13 February 2021.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Aquaculture
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/aquaculture

Review

Single cell protein: Sources, mechanism of production, nutritional value and
its uses in aquaculture nutrition

T

Muhammad Sharifa, Muhammad Hammad Zafara, Amjad Islam Aqibb, , Muhammad Saeedb,
⁎
Mayada R. Faragc, Mahmoud Alagawanyd,
⁎

a

Institute of Animal and Dairy Sciences, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bahawalpur 63100, Pakistan
c
Forensic Medicine and Toxicology Department, Veterinary Medicine Faculty, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44511, Egypt
d
Department of Poultry, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44511, Egypt
b

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
Single cell protein
Sources
Mechanism of production
Nutritional benefits

Single cell protein (SCP) is a bulk of dried cells which can also termed as bioprotein, microbial protein or
biomass. SCP is produced by the microorganisms such as algae, yeast, fungi and bacteria, however, fungi and
bacteria are the major producers of this protein. High production of proteins from these sources was mainly due
to their fast growth rate and relatively higher protein level in their chemical structure. Some algal species were
also used for this purpose which specifically cultivated in the aquatic medium. In addition to high content of
protein, SCP also contains carbohydrates, nucleic acids, fats, minerals and vitamins. Additionally, SCP has a high
level of essential amino acids such as lysine, methionine, and threonine. This source of protein (SCP) has been
proved a good replacement of other expensive protein sources like fish and soybean meals. Therefore, conclusion
can be made that SCP can easily replace traditional (plant and animal) protein sources in human, animal as well
as fish diets without any detrimental effect. Finally, in this review, we focus on new feeding trials on SCP in some
aquaculture species, such as Atlantic salmon, white leg shrimp and rainbow trout.

1. Introduction
Fish are an important source of dietary protein for humans, providing more than 3.1 billion people with about 20% of their average per
capita animal protein intake (Abd El-Hack et al., 2016; FAO, 2016;
Alagawany et al., 2020a, 2020b, 2020c). Production of nutritious and
harmless compounds from different biodegradable waste is one of the
basic principles in waste management. In ancient times, wastes were
treated with various chemicals for their decomposition but this method
was not satisfactory for better disposal (Kost et al., 2013). Now, it is
possible to convert various wastes into valuable food or feed products
for humans and animals which is not only an environment friendly way
but also a healthy business activity (Browne et al., 2011). Many types of
wastes are still adding pollution to the environment or being processed
into low quality products such as biogas, biofuels and bioenergy
(Lipinsky, 1981). Different methods and techniques are emerging and
providing opportunity to develop high quality products such as single
cell oil, single cell protein, chemicals, enzymes and many others. Single
cell protein is one of these high quality dietary products obtained from
wastes (El-Bakry et al., 2015; de Finco et al., 2017; FitzPatrick et al.,

⁎

2010; Werpy et al., 2004).
Single cell protein (SCP) is a bulk of dried cells (biomass) which is
produced by algae, yeast, bacteria and fungi. It can also be termed as
bioprotein, microbial protein or biomass (Saeed et al., 2016). These
microbes can be utilized as protein rich supplements or ingredients in
humans and animals' diet (Ritala et al., 2017). Single cell protein can be
a good alternative to plant protein sources as they do not require large
area of land or large reservoirs of water for its production (Mekonnen
and Hoekstra, 2014). Unlike plant sources, their production is also independent of seasonal and climatic variations and it can be produced
throughout the year. Moreover, they do not emit greenhouse gasses to
the environment as in the case of plant protein sources (Vermeulen
et al., 2012).
To reduce the production cost of single cell proteins, the most important thing is the selection of cheap and suitable substrates or biodegradable agro-industrial byproducts as a nutrient source for the microorganisms to grow and produce tons of protein (Anupama and
Ravindra, 2000). For this purpose, different substrates were used and
compared in the past. Some of the commonly used substrates are apple
pomace, yam peels, citrus pulp, potato peels, pineapple waste, papaya

Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: amjadwaseer@cuvas.edu.pk (A.I. Aqib), mmalagwany@zu.edu.eg (M. Alagawany).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2020.735885
Received 27 July 2020; Received in revised form 20 August 2020; Accepted 24 August 2020
Available online 11 September 2020
0044-8486/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

M. Sharif, et al.

waste etc. (Nasseri et al., 2011). It is also very important to choose
suitable waste product for the proliferation of single cell protein producing microorganism. Nowadays, for both research and industrial
purpose, availability of microorganisms is not an issue as many strains
of bacteria, algae, fungi and yeast can be cultured in the laboratory by
different ways. Mainly, microorganisms do not depend on substrate
properties with exception of few. However, substrate availability is very
limited regarding the consumer and concerned economy (Ritala et al.,
2017). In this review, different points such as production of single cell
protein, mechanism of production, methods of production, nutritional
values, beneficial uses in fish nutrition, and criteria for microbe's selection and available substrates will be discussed.

Table 1
List of substrates for various bacterial species.1
Substrates for bacteria to produce SCP

2. Single cell protein
The word single cell protein (SCP) is considered to be the most
appropriate term as it is produced from single celled organisms (Jamal
et al., 2008). It was found that yeast is capable of producing about 250
tons of protein in 24 h (Aggelopoulos et al., 2014).
The term of SCP was introduced for the first time in 1968 when
scientists were together in a meeting to discover the best alternate of
the terminologies which were used in common practice i.e. microbial
protein at Masachusetts Institute of Technology, United States
(Paraskevopoulou et al., 2003). Single cell protein is produced by
various microbial species which include algae, bacteria, fungi and
yeast. Among them, fungi and bacteria are the major producers of that
protein (Anupama and Ravindra, 2000) as they characterised by fast
rate of growth and higher protein content (Gao et al., 2007). Some algal
species that are cultivated specifically in the aquatic media were also
used for this purpose (Voltolina et al., 2005).
In addition to high protein content which is 60–82% on dry matter
basis, SCP also consists of carbohydrates, nucleic acids, fats, minerals
and vitamins (Jacob-Lopes et al., 2006). Another advantage associated
with SCP is that it is rich in various essential amino acids such as lysine,
methionine which are not present in sufficient amounts in most animal
and plant sources (Gao et al., 2012). SCP has been reported to be a good
replacement of expensive protein sources like fish meal and soybean
meal (Goldberg, 2013). Protein presents in appreciable amounts in
microbial cells which are formed from different sources of inorganic
nitrogen such as ammonia (Nasseri et al., 2011) and presents also in
algae (Ghasemi et al., 2011). The use of different organic sources such
as waste products from industry and agriculture is also very common
for SCP production (Gervasi et al., 2018).

Bacteria

Substrates

Various bacterial species
Methylococcaceae family
Bacillus cereus
Rhodopseudomonas gelatinosus
Methylomonas species
Brevibacterium spp.
Ralstonia species
Bacillus licheniformis
Streptomyces species
Corynobacterium ammoniagenes
Escherichia coli
Cellulomonas species
Corynebacterium glutamicum
Methanomonas methanica
Cupriavidus necator
Methylophilus methanotrophus
Bacillus pumilis
Rhodopseudomonas palustris
Bacillus subtilis
Rhizospheric diazotrophs
Pseudomonas fluorescens

Waste of fruit processing
C-1 compounds
Ram horn
Wheat bran
Methane broth
C-1 to C-4 compounds
Natural gas
Potato waste
Methanol
Fructose and Glucose
Ram horn
Agro-industrial wastes
Glucose
Methane
Synthetic growth media
Methanol
Potato processing waste
Rubber waste
Ram horn
Brewery wastewater
Animal waste & Manure

(Kadim et al., 2015; Lang et al., 1999; Mahasneh, 1997; Queiroz et al., 2007;
Raja et al., 2008; Ravinder et al., 2003; Sousa et al., 2008; Turnbull et al., 1992;
Ugalde and Castrillo, 2002; Zepka et al., 2008).

Methylomonas methylotrophus, Thermomonospora fusca, Lactobacillus spp.
Rhodopseudomonas capsulate, Flavobacterium species and Pseudomonas
fluorescens (Ashok et al., 2000; Dharumadurai et al., 2011; Piper, 2004).
3.2. Algal sources
Certain types of microalgae are cultivated for animal and human
consumption and usually have healthy protein contents which can go
up to 70%. Apart from the proteins, they are excellent sources of fats
mainly omega-3 fatty acids, mineral salts, vitamins and chlorophyll
(Sousa et al., 2008). However, they contain relatively low amount of
nucleic acid content which ranges from 3% to 8% (Nasseri et al., 2011).
List of substrates for various algal species is shown in Table 2.
An algal species named spirulina was harvested by some Mexican
and African people near texcoco. It was dried to be used in the human
diet. In different parts of the world, biomass of some other species such
as Chlorella and Senedessmus has also been used as a feed source. High
protein content, rapid growth, simple cultivation and a good usage of
solar energy are the major advantages due to which they are widely
accepted as feed ingredient throughout the world (Raja et al., 2008).
Green algae are considered as a good antioxidant. Moreover, progenitor
cells can be protected by using the diet having algal species named

3. Sources for single cell protein
3.1. Bacterial sources
Generation time of bacteria is very short as their cell masses multiply quickly within 20 to 120 min (Bamberg, 2000). They also have the
ability of growing on wide range of raw materials (Øverland et al.,
2010) and edible substrates like starches and sugars (Suman et al.,
2015). Bacteria can easily multiply on wastes of organic matter and
petrochemicals i.e. ethanol, methanol and nitrogen. They can also
multiply in natural water supplemented with minerals and nutrients
which are helpful to fulfill deficiency of nutrients needed for their
growth. Some bacteria like Methylophilus spp. has a very short generation time of 2 h and is also a useful constituent of animal feed. Moreover, their protein is chemically better than any yeast or fungi
(Majekodunmi et al., 2011). List of substrates for various bacterial
species is illustrated in Table 1.
Numerous bacterial species are present which have been included in
animal feed since long time and have the ability of producing SCP in
large quantities like Brevibacterium, Methylophilus methylitropous,
Bacillus megaterium, Acinetobacter calcoacenticus, Acromobacter delvaevate, Aeromonas hydrophilla, Cellulomonas spp. Bacillus subtilis,

Table 2
List of substrates for various algal species.
Substrates for algae to produce SCP
Algae

Substrate

Spirulina species
Chlorella salina
Caulerpa rocemosa
Spirulina maxima
Chlorella species.
Sargassum
Dunaliella
Laminaria
Diatoms and Chlorella
Porphyra

Carbon dioxide
Alkaline waste effluent
Carbon dioxide
Sunlight and carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide and Sunlight
Carbon dioxide and Sunlight
Carbon dioxide and Sunlight
Carbon dioxide and Sunlight
Carbon dioxide and Sunlight

(Anupama and Ravindra, 2000)
2

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

M. Sharif, et al.

et al., 2015). After the completion of the fermentation process, the
available biomass is harvested which can further be utilized as a protein
source (Zepka et al., 2008). Then this source undergoes further processing techniques like purification, cell disruption, washing followed
by protein extraction (John et al., 2011) to give generally high production rates along with better yield and makes the production control
relatively easier.
Waste materials from the agricultural industry have been reported
to be a good substrate for SCP production. When SCP produced by these
wastes and microbes the resultant protein enriched product was of a
good quality and economical value to be used in animal feed. Further
processing makes it edible even for the human beings (Yunus et al.,
2015). There are various microbes which are involved in the bioconversion of different substrates and industrial wastes into the valuable products.
Jacob-Lopes et al. (Jacob-Lopes et al., 2006) used cyanobacterium
for the production of SCP. Nasseri et al. (Nasseri et al., 2011) used
different substrates for the production of SCP and found that substrates
with carbon skeleton were very useful for this purpose. Moreover,
cellulose and hemicellulose also have been proven to be useful substrates as well. Similarly, (Ashok et al., 2000) also found that the fermentation of different substrates like hemicellulose and cellulose from
the plants nail, hair, feather and different nitrogenous compounds from
animals could be useful substrates for the SCP production following
different hydrolyzation methods i.e. physical, chemical and enzymatic.

Table 3
List of substrates for various fungal species.
Fungal species

Substrates

Aspergillus flavus
Aspergillus ochraceus
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Yarrowia lipolytica
Aspergillus niger

Rice bran
Rice bran
Orange pulp, molasses, brewer's spent grain
Inulin, crude oil, glycerol waste hydrocarbons
Apple pomace, Banana waste, Rice bran, Potato
starch
Citrus pulp
Rice bran
Cheese whey filtrate
Rice bran
Rice bran
Orange pulp, molasses, brewer's spent grain,
whey, potato pulp
Poultry litter; Waste capsicum powder
Rice bran
Rice bran
Molasses

Trichoderma virideae
Aspergillus ochraceus
Trichoderma harzianum
Penicillium citrinum
Aspergillus oryzae
Kluyveromyces marxianus
Candida utilis
Cladosporium cladosporioides
Monascus ruber
Candida tropicalis

(Aruna et al., 2017; Bhalla and Joshi, 1994; Bogdahn, 2015; Deise Maria
Fontana et al., 2001; Ferreira et al., 2010; Guo et al., 2019a; Jay et al., 2005;
Kam et al., 2012; Øverland et al., 2013; Øvrum Hansen et al., 2019;
Paraskevopoulou et al., 2003; Prado-Rubio et al., 2010; Serrano et al., 2006;
Singhania et al., 2008; Ugalde and Castrillo, 2002; Yousufi, 2012; Zhou et al.,
2017)

Spirulina maxima along with nutraceuticals. They also have the ability
to prevent fatty liver syndrome (Mahasneh, 1997).

5. Criteria for the selection of microorganism

3.3. Fungal sources

The fast growing microorganisms are required for getting massive
output (biomass weight produced per unit time). However, high output
produces more quantities of RNA in the cell, RNA production is not
desirable as it acts as anti-nutritional factor in the final product.
Biomass yield coefficient is the total weight of newly produced cells per
unit of consumed substrate (Waldron and Lacroute, 1975). This condition is very useful especially when substrate is expensive (Boehlke
and Friesen, 1975). If the growth rate is slow, more amount of substrate
will be consumed with less output and this will affect the yield coefficient adversely (Leuenberger, 1972).
Different organisms have different tolerant levels against heat
shock. When cells from different microbes are subjected to the heat
shock, they develop resistance to different stresses. This is lethal in
normal conditions but a phenomenon is adopted by the cells called
acquired stress tolerance. Stress tolerance can be developed by application of different treatments like chemicals or heat. Application of
these treatments also leads to the production of a special type of protein
termed as heat shock proteins (Tamura et al., 1998). A mild type of heat
shock at 37 °C for 30 min develops oxidative stress in both types of cells
i.e. aerobic and anaerobic. Sensitivity to both oxidative and heat stress
is totally dependent on lipid composition of the membrane (Steels et al.,
1994). Every organism has different ability to cope with the increase in
temperature which occurs during exothermic fermentation. This also
reduces the needs for cooling. The ability of a microorganism to show
its growing potential at a particular temperature overcomes the need
for heating or cooling. Wider tolerable temperature range for the microorganisms lessens the need of temperature control during the fermentation process.
The pH of growth medium also tends to change during process of
fermentation. In most of the cases, buffer is added to the media along
with the association of the fermenter with pH control. However, ability
of microbes to tolerate a wide range of pH can overcome the need of pH
control. Fungi usually require lower pH than bacteria for their growth.
Therefore, bacterial growth can be inhibited during cultivation by
maintaining low pH in the media. So, by adopting these procedures,
different costs regarding sterilization and aseptic measures can be
minimized (Serrano et al., 2006).

List of substrates for various fungal species is illustrated in Table 3.
Many fungal species are used for the production of single cell proteins.
Protein from the different fungal species is preferred over different
sources due to its chemical composition and amino acid profile
(Ravinder et al., 2003). Fungi contain 30% to 50% protein when they
were cultivated mainly for the SCP production. Their amino acid profile
also met the standards of FAO. Their protein is rich in lysine and
threonine but deficient in cysteine and methionine as they are sulphur
containing amino acids and mainly come from plant sources (Nasseri
et al., 2011). However, the fungus K. fragilis has the ability to produce
sulphur containing amino acids when grows on the whey (Ugalde and
Castrillo, 2002).
Single cell protein obtained from the fungi could provide some other
nutrients in addition to protein. These nutrients include different vitamins mainly from vitamin B-complex such as riboflavin, niacin, thiamine, biotin, pantothenic acid, choline, pyridoxine, glutathione, pamino benzoic acid, streptogenin and folic acid (Turnbull et al., 1992).
However, a decrease in insulin and blood glucose level was reported
after feeding on mycoprotein obtained from Fusarium venenatum (Lang
et al., 1999). Fungi have relatively high amount of nucleic acid content
as compared to algae and it ranges from 7% to 10% (Nasseri et al.,
2011).
A process termed as “Pekilo” was established in Finland to obtain
single cell protein from the fungi to feed the animals. A filamentous
fungus named Paecilomyces varioti was cultivated on different sugars
like pentoses along with wood hydrolysates or waste from sulphites.
Then the fermentation resulted in the production of SCP as a final
product (Ugalde and Castrillo, 2002).
4. Mechanism of production
Actually, microorganisms utilize the available wastes and use them
as growth medium to increase their cell masses which are made up of
the SCP (Queiroz et al., 2007). Fermentation either submerged or solid
in nature is the main process responsible for SCP production (Kadim
3

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

M. Sharif, et al.

6. Substrates for single cell protein production

protocols (Nasseri et al., 2011). Then the optimization of the conditions
needed for proper cultivation is done followed by the determination of
cell structures and metabolic pathways. Moreover, apparatus technology and process engineering are adapted to improve the technical
performance of the whole phenomena. This will make the final product
ready for use on large technical scale. Protection and safety of the innovation helps to overcome important aspects regarding product authorizations and operating. These are also required for the protection of
the environment due to the use of living microorganisms in the whole
process (Anupama and Ravindra, 2000).

Substrates are selected on the basis of their abundance in the
proximity of the production area. Design and strategy of production
process also depend on the nature of substrate. Carbohydrate derived
sources with carbon as essential components are widely used for this
purpose (Nasseri et al., 2011). The reason for using these substrates is
due to microbial dependence on the monosaccharides and disaccharides for their multiplication which serve as building blocks of
substrates. Moreover, carbohydrates are easily available and widely
distributed in nature and have high energy value. So, the abundance of
these substances makes them a good choice for substrate (Ugalde and
Castrillo, 2002).
Many other substrates such as molasses, whey, starch, alkanes and
hydrocarbons are also used for this purpose. Some microorganisms
have some additional growth and maintenance requirements like vitamins and minerals which should be properly fulfilled to obtain maximum output (Jay et al., 2005).
Limitations regarding photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic microorganisms do not exist for SCP production as all types of microbes
can take part in this process. Microorganisms require nitrogen for their
multiplication and production of SCP. Different sources of nitrogen like
ammonia, ammonium salt or nitrate are consumed by microbes as nitrogen source (Ugalde and Castrillo, 2002). Proper carbon to nitrogen
ratio should be also maintained in the growth media. Ratio of 10:1 is
reported as the most appropriate results as the same ratio presents in
the microorganism. However, this ratio is different among different
microbes. Higher ratio will cause disappearance of ammonia before all
sugars are consumed and the required biomass will not be obtained.
While at the ratio of 1:1, most of the ammonia cannot enter the cells
and will be wasted (Bamberg, 2000).
Cost of the substrates used in production of SCP usually represents
45–75% of the total cost of production. Major portion of the cost is
taken by the carbon source while ammonia contributes only 7–15% of
the total substrate. Carbon dioxide present in the atmosphere is free,
but high energy is required for agitation purpose. Agitation is helpful to
dissolve it into dense cultures of algae (Kam et al., 2012). Different
agricultural and industrial wastes are more abundance and relatively
cheaper than the other sources. These wastes also represent 20–30% of
the total production cost. However, solid wastes from the agriculture
sector such as celluloses require special treatment before its usage for
human beings and this is very expensive. Industrial wastes have high
levels of biological oxygen demand which can cause environmental
pollution if disposed without any treatment (Anupama and Ravindra,
2000).
Using industrial and agricultural wastes for SCP production of not
only reduces the biological oxygen demand by almost 80% but also
minimizes the treatment cost required for their disposal (Ravinder
et al., 2003). Hydrocarbons along with their derivatives are also used as
substrates and represent 30–70% of the total production cost. They are
usually obtained from natural gas or oil which is non-renewable in
nature and so expensive. Another drawback of using them as substrates
is their use as petrochemicals and fuels and their usage is also politically
controversial (Ritala et al., 2017).

8. Nutritional benefits of SCP
Nutritional value of SCP completely depends on its chemical composition from amino acids, nucleic acids minerals, enzymes and vitamins in addition to the high protein content which is relatively cheaper
than other plant and animal sources (Bogdahn, 2015). It is reported that
dried cells of Pseudomonas spp. grew on petroleum based liquid paraffin
contain protein as high as 69%. Single cell protein obtained by algae
processing is about 40%. Ferreira et al. (Ferreira et al., 2010) stated that
protein obtained from microbes contains all essential amino acids depending on the type of substrate used (carbon or nitrogen source) and
the type of microorganism grown on a specific media.
Microorganisms like bacteria and yeast have a very short multiplication time as they double their population in just 5–15 min. While,
algae and mold species double themselves in 2–4 h. Amino acid profile
of SCP from bacteria shows a close resemblance with fish protein.
However, protein from yeast resembles to soya protein (Yousufi, 2012).
In addition, SCP is reported to be deficient in sulphur containing amino
acids such as methionine and cysteine whereas high levels of lysine and
other amino acids have been observed. So, supplementation of these
two amino acids is required for the use of SCP as a feed ingredient.
Microorganisms normally contain Vitamin B12 in significant amounts.
Bacteria and algae are reported with high vitamin B12 and vitamin A
content respectively. Most common vitamins present in SCP are riboflavin, thiamine, pyridoxine, niacin choline, folic acid, pantothenic
acid, biotin, para amino benzoic acid, inositol and B12 (Anupama and
Ravindra, 2000).
Most microorganisms have very fast growth rate that yields high
amount of biomass as result of their multiplication (algae: 3–6 h, bacteria: 30 min to 2 h, yeast: 40 min to 3 h) (Nasseri et al., 2011). These
microorganisms can be used as a whole in contrast to most of the crops
and animal protein sources which cannot be used entirely (Zhou et al.,
2017). SCP produced from different microbes has high protein content
(30–70%) as compared to different green plants and animal sources.
Moreover, these proteins have excellent amino acids profile that makes
them nutritionally more useful than conventional protein sources
(Aruna et al., 2017).
Some microorganisms during their course of SCP production produce significant amounts of vitamins which cannot be produced by the
host individual in appropriate amounts. Production of SCP also requires
low water content as compared to the plant sources (Majekodunmi
et al., 2011). Unlike plant protein sources, it is independent of environmental and climatic variation and can be produced throughout the
year as microbes are available round the clock (Bhalla and Joshi, 1994).

7. Industrial production of SCP

9. Submerged fermentation

Fermentation is the main process involved in the production of SCP
(Fig. 1). Specific strain of microorganisms is selected according to the
situation. Selected strains are grown and multiplied on suitable substrates in technical cultivation process. This leads to cultural growth
and increase in the biomass which is then followed by the separation
process. Next step is the development which begins with the screening
of microbes in which suitable microbial strains are obtained from soil,
air and water samples or from swabs of biological or inorganic materials. These are then optimized by mutation, selection or other genetic

Submerged fermentation is the process in which substrate is always
used in the liquid form containing all the necessary nutrients needed for
their growth. Whole process is carried out in a fermenter which is operated in a continuous manner and the resultant biomass is harvested
continuously using various techniques. Centrifugation or filtration of
the final product is done followed by drying. Aeration is also important
during whole cultivation operation as heat is generated in this process
which needs to be removed with the time by a proper cooling
4

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

M. Sharif, et al.

Fig. 1. General steps during industrial production of SCP.

mechanism. Different microorganisms require different methods for
their recovery as bacteria can be recovered by centrifugation while filamentous fungi require filtration for their recovery. Recovery of
maximum water content is desirable as it contains important soluble
nutrients which become available after drying (Nasseri et al., 2011).

11. Solid state fermentation
Solid state fermentation is carried out by using different types of
fermenter designs, a variety of microorganisms and different environmental conditions during fermentation. Resultant products can be SCP,
enzymes, feeds, organic acids, ethanol, pigments, B complex vitamins
or flavors. The process requires substrate in pure solid form like wheat
bran or rice bran. Selected substrate is spread on the flatbeds after inoculation with microorganisms. Proper moisture level (60–65%) is
maintained to get optimum yield (Singhania et al., 2008). Microorganisms show their maximum growth potential in liquid culture
medium. Continuous oxygen supply to microbes is maintained in liquid
phase which is achieved by stirring the fermentation medium. Proper
regulation of temperature, ionic strength, soluble oxygen, nutrients
control and pH are the factors which help the synthesis of desired
metabolites (Deise Maria Fontana et al., 2001).

10. Semisolid fermentation
In semisolid fermentation process, substrate preparation is an important factor as it is used in solid state. This type of fermentation requires high capital investment and operating cost. Cultivation is done
through many operations like multiphase system mixing, stirring,
transport of oxygen molecules from gas bubbles to microorganisms
through the liquid phase and ultimately transfers heat from liquid phase
to the surroundings. A specific type of bioreactor is designed for identification of energy and mass transportation phenomena termed as Uloop fermenter (Prado-Rubio et al., 2010).
Single cell protein production by semisolid fermentation involves
some basic steps such as preparation of suitable media having a specific
carbon source, proper sterilization of the media and the fermenter to
avoid any microbial contamination, biomass production using desirable
strain of a particular microorganism, separation of the final product and
its processing. Different types of carbon sources are used for this purpose including gaseous hydrocarbons, n-alkenes, ethanol, methanol,
carbon oxide, polysaccharides, molasses, effluents of various breweries
and other solid compounds (Nasseri et al., 2011).

12. SCP feeding trial in fish
Several yeast meals have been studied such as Candida utilis, S.
cerevisiae, and K. marxianus (Øverland et al., 2013; Øvrum Hansen
et al., 2019). Saccharomyces cerevisiae was found to be a poor protein
meal, while (Øverland et al., 2013) used 40% of K. marxianus and C.
utilis instead of fishmeal in rations. For shrimp, several products of S.
cerevisiae were used in diets (from 15 to 24%, depending on the product) to replace fishmeal or soybean meal (up to 24%) with no impact
5

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

M. Sharif, et al.

microbes should become inactive before consumption due to development of unpleasant color and taste. If unprocessed product is used before killing the active microbes then incidence of skin and gastrointestinal infections is increased which sometimes leading to nausea
and vomiting. Filamentous fungi have high growth rates than yeasts
along with more risk of contamination than any other microorganism.
In case of bacteria, more RNA content, risk of contamination and endotoxins are the most limiting factors.
Some toxic substances i.e. mycotoxins, cyanotoxins can be produced
by certain microorganisms used during SCP production. This can be
counteracted by selecting proper microorganism for processing. Due to
the substances present in the substrate and some produced by the microorganisms, the final product sometimes leads to indigestion. Apart
from toxic substances, some carcinogenic substances may be produced
when microbes undergo mutation during processing and formation of
final product which could be toxic for both humans and livestock.
Moreover, algae is free of toxins, however, it has a very slow growth
rate or low density like 1–2 g per liter of the substrate. All of the above
problems can be avoided by carefully optimizing the fermentation
protocol during SCP production. Moreover, the selection of active microorganism along with suitable substrate is also helpful in counteracting the above limitations and makes the usage of SCP beneficial.
Furthermore, anti-nutritional factors i.e. nucleic acids can also be removed by applying different physical and chemical treatments during
processing (Dantas Jr et al., 2016).

on growth rate (Guo et al., 2019a, 2019b; Jin et al., 2018). Several
different methanotroph-based SCP meals have been studied successfully
on Atlantic salmon. Salmon fed rations contained 36% SCP (bacterial
protein meal) displayed a higher feed efficiency ratio and growth rate
than the control ration, but digestibility of nutrient was reduced. In
another study, (Aas et al., 2006) stated that SCP (Methylococcus capsulatus) can make up to 38% of the dietary protein in trout rations and
52% in salmon rations without any adverse effect on growth performance. Interestingly, the use of SCP (M. capsulatus) in soybean meal
(SBM) diets prevented the development of SBM-induced enteritis in
salmon fish, suggesting further benefits of microbial protein products
(Romarheim et al., 2011). KnipBio Meal (Methylobacterium extorquens) could be used up to 55% instead of fishmeal in salmon rations
without adverse impacts on growth (Tlusty et al., 2017) and up to 10%
instead of SBM in trout rations (Hardy et al., 2018). In shrimp, use of a
mixture of two purple non‑sulphur bacteria (1%) in the ration improved
the growth than control (Chumpol et al., 2018). The SCP (Corynebacterium ammoniagenes) could be used up to 10–20% (Hamidoghli
et al., 2019), and Methylobacterium extorquens SCP was found to be
able to completely replace fishmeal in shrimp rations (Hardy et al.,
2018). (Dantas Jr et al., 2016) used a biofloc meal up to 30% in shrimp
diets instead of fishmeal. Effect of using some sources of SCP in fish
feeding is illustrated in Fig. 2.
13. Challenges of using SCP
Apart from having very attractive characteristics, SCP also has some
limitations to be included in humans or animal diet. Main anti-nutritional factor is the high concentration of nucleic acid which is more
abundant in SCP than other conventional protein sources. This high
nucleic acid content enhances the uric acid in the serum that ultimately
leads to the formation kidney stones. Most of the nitrogen (70–80%)
presents in the form of amino acids while rest is in the form of nucleic
acids which is a key property of the fast growing microorganisms.
Moreover, it also consists of cell wall which is non-digestible in case of
simple stomach animals and birds. It is further reported that live cells of

14. Conclusion
Single cell proteins exhibit very attractive characteristics as a nutrient supplement for both animals and plants. It can be produced at
any time during a year because of their independence from seasonal
and climatic variations. It could be produced from various cost free
substrates. Therefore, conclusion can be made that it can easily replace
conventional animal and protein sources in both humans and animal
diets without any negative impact.

Fig. 2. Effect of using some sources of SCP in fish feeding.
6

Aquaculture 531 (2021) 735885

M. Sharif, et al.

Funding source

value-added products. Bioresour. Technol. 101, 8915–8922. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biortech.2010.06.125.
Gao, L., Chi, Z., Sheng, J., Ni, X., Wang, L., 2007. Single-cell protein production from
Jerusalem artichoke extract by a recently isolated marine yeast Cryptococcus aureus
G7a and its nutritive analysis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 77, 825–832. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00253-007-1210-7.
Gao, Y., Li, D., Liu, Y., 2012. Production of single cell protein from soy molasses using
Candida tropicalis. Ann. Microbiol. 62, 1165–1172. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13213-011-0356-9.
Gervasi, T., Pellizzeri, V., Calabrese, G., Di Bella, G., Cicero, N., Dugo, G., 2018.
Production of single cell protein (SCP) from food and agricultural waste by using
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nat. Prod. Res. 32, 648–653. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14786419.2017.1332617.
Ghasemi, Y., Rasoul-Amini, S., Morowvat, M.H., 2011. Algae for the production of SCP.
Bioprocess Sci. Technol. Nov. Sci. Publ. Inc 163–184.
Goldberg, I., 2013. Single Cell Protein. Springer Science & Business Media.
Guo, J., Qiu, X., Salze, G., Davis, D.A., 2019a. Use of high-protein brewer’s yeast products
in practical diets for the Pacific white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei. Aquac. Nutr. 25,
680–690. https://doi.org/10.1111/anu.12889.
Guo, J., Reis, J., Salze, G., Rhodes, M., Tilton, S., Davis, D.A., 2019b. Using high protein
distiller’s dried grain product to replace corn protein concentrate and fishmeal in
practical diets for the Pacific white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei. J. World Aquacult.
Soc. 50, 983–992. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwas.12606.
Hamidoghli, A., Yun, H., Won, S., Kim, S., Farris, N.W., Bai, S.C., 2019. Evaluation of a
single-cell protein as a dietary fish meal substitute for whiteleg shrimp Litopenaeus
vannamei. Fish. Sci. 85, 147–155.
Hardy, R.W., Patro, B., Pujol-Baxley, C., Marx, C.J., Feinberg, L., 2018. Partial replacement of soybean meal with Methylobacterium extorquens single-cell protein in feeds
for rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss Walbaum). Aquac. Res. 49, 2218–2224.
https://doi.org/10.1111/are.13678.
Jacob-Lopes, E., Zepka, L.Q., Queiroz, M.I., Netto, F.M., 2006. Protein characterisation of
the Aphanothece Microscopica Nägeli cyanobacterium cultivated in parboiled rice
effluent. Food Sci. Technol. 26, 482–488.
Jamal, P., Alam, M., SALLEH, N., 2008. Medai optimization for bioproteins productions
from cheaper carbon source. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 3, 124–130.
Jay, J.M., Loessner, M.J., Golden, D.A., 2005. Indicators of food microbial quality and
safety. Mod. Food Microbiol. 1, 473–495.
Jin, M., Xiong, J., Zhou, Q.-C., Yuan, Y., Wang, X.-X., Sun, P., 2018. Dietary yeast hydrolysate and brewer’s yeast supplementation could enhance growth performance,
innate immunity capacity and ammonia nitrogen stress resistance ability of Pacific
white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). Fish Shellfish Immunol. 82, 121–129. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fsi.2018.08.020.
John, R.P., Anisha, G.S., Nampoothiri, K.M., Pandey, A., 2011. Micro and macroalgal
biomass: a renewable source for bioethanol. Bioresour. Technol. 102, 186–193.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.06.139.
Kadim, I.T., Mahgoub, O., Baqir, S., Faye, B., Purchas, R., 2015. Cultured meat from
muscle stem cells: a review of challenges and prospects. J. Integr. Agric. 14, 222–233.
Kam, S., Kenari, A.A., Younesi, H., 2012. Production of single cell protein in stickwater by
lactobacillus acidophilus and Aspergillus Niger. J. Aquat. Food Prod. Technol. 21,
403–417. https://doi.org/10.1080/10498850.2011.605539.
Kost, C., Mayer, J.N., Thomsen, J., Hartmann, N., Senkpiel, C., Philipps, S., Nold, S., Lude,
S., Saad, N., Schlegl, T., 2013. Levelized cost of electricity renewable energy technologies. Fraunhofer Inst. Sol. Energy Syst. ISE 144.
Lang, V., Bellisle, F., Alamowitch, C., Craplet, C., Bornet, F.R., Slama, G., Guy-Grand, B.,
1999. Varying the protein source in mixed meal modifies glucose, insulin and glucagon kinetics in healthy men, has weak effects on subjective satiety and fails to
affect food intake. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 53, 959–965. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.
1600881.
Leuenberger, H.G., 1972. Cultivation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in continuous culture.
II. Influence of the crabtree effect on the growth characteristics of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae grown in a glucose limited chemostat. Arch. Mikrobiol. 83, 347–358.
Lipinsky, E.S., 1981. Chemicals from biomass: petrochemical substitution options.
Science 212, 1465–1471. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.212.4502.1465.
Mahasneh, I.A., 1997. Production of single cell protein from five strains of the microalga
Chlorella spp. (Chlorophyta). Cytobios 90, 153–161.
Majekodunmi, A., Ajiboye, E., Odaibo, A., 2011. Single cell proteins: as nutritional enhancer. Adv. Appl. Sci. Res. 2, 396–409.
Mekonnen, M.M., Hoekstra, A.Y., 2014. Water footprint benchmarks for crop production:
a first global assessment. Ecol. Indic. 46, 214–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2014.06.013.
Nasseri, A.T., Rasoul-Amini, S., Morowvat, M.H., Ghasemi, Y., 2011. Single cell protein:
production and process. Am. J. Food Technol. 6, 103–116.
Øverland, M., Tauson, A.-H., Shearer, K., Skrede, A., 2010. Evaluation of methane-utilising bacteria products as feed ingredients for monogastric animals. Arch. Anim.
Nutr. 64, 171–189. https://doi.org/10.1080/17450391003691534.
Øverland, M., Karlsson-Drangsholt, A., Mydland, L., Romarheim, O., Skrede, A., 2013.
Evaluation of Candida utilis, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeasts as protein sources in diets for Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Aquaculture
402–403, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2013.03.016.
Øvrum Hansen, J., Hofossæter, M., Sahlmann, C., Ånestad, R., Reveco-Urzua, F.E., Press,
C.M., Mydland, L.T., Øverland, M., 2019. Effect of Candida utilis on growth and
intestinal health of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) parr. Aquaculture 511, 734239.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2019.734239.
Paraskevopoulou, A., Athanasiadis, I., Kanellaki, M., Bekatorou, A., Blekas, G.,
Kiosseoglou, V., 2003. Functional properties of single cell protein produced by kefir
microflora. Food Res. Int. 36, 431–438. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0963-9969(02)

Authors did not receive any funding from any source.
Declaration of Competing Interest
Authors' declare no conflict of interest.