Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-020-03437-0

Bioethanol Production from Azolla filiculoides
by Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Pichia stipitis, Candida
lusitaniae, and Kluyveromyces marxianus
Mariam H. Chupaza 1,2,3 & Yu-Rim Park 1 & So Hee Kim 1 & Ji Won Yang 1 &
Gwi-Teak Jeong 1 & Sung-Koo Kim 1
Received: 30 July 2020 / Accepted: 29 September 2020/
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract

Ethanol was produced by separate hydrolysis and fermentation using Azolla filiculoides
as a biomass. Thermal acid hydrolysis and enzymatic saccharification were used as
pretreatment methods to produce monosaccharides from Azolla. The optimal content
for thermal acid hydrolysis of 14% (w/v) Azolla weed slurry produced 16.7-g/L monosaccharides by using 200 mM H2SO4 at 121 °C for 60 min. Enzymatic saccharification
using 16 U/mL Viscozyme produced 61.6 g/L monosaccharide at 48 h. Ethanol productions with ethanol yield coefficients from Azolla weed hydrolysate using Kluyveromyces
marxianus, Candida lusitaniae Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Pichia stipitis were
26.8 g/L (YEtOH = 0.43), 23.2 g/L (YEtOH = 0.37), 18.2 g/L (YEtOH = 0.29), and 13.7 g/
L (YEtOH = 0.22), respectively. Saccharomyces cerevisiae produces the lowest yield as it
utilized only glucose. Bioethanol from Azolla weed hydrolysate can be successfully
produced by using Kluyveromyces marxianus because it consumed the mixture of glucose
and xylose completely within 60 h.
Keywords Bioethanol . Azolla filiculoides . Kluyveromyces marxianus . Candida lusitaniae .
Pichia stipitis . Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Mariam H. Chupaza and Yu-Rim Park are co-first authors.

* Sung-Koo Kim
skkim@pknu.ac.kr

1

School of Marine Fisheries, and Life Science (Major in Biotechnology), Pukyong National
University, 48513 Busan, Republic of Korea

2

KOICA-PKNU International Graduate Program of Fisheries Science, Pukyong National University,
Busan 48513, Republic of Korea

3

Department of Fishing and Fish Processing, Fisheries Education and Training Agency, P.O. Box 83,
Bagamoyo, Costal Region, Tanzania

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Introduction
In the twenty-first century, the society is facing global challenges on how and where to
get sufficient and sustainable energy for transportation, heating and industrial processes,
and raw material for different industries to run the world in a sustainable way [1].
Currently, the goals of study are to reduce our dependency on fossil fuels and prevent
further deforestation and competition with foods. This has triggered an extensive search
for domestication of new bioenergy feedstock which can generate substantial renewable
biomass over a short period with rich bioenergy molecules which can be converted into
biofuels using a set of well-established technologies [2]. Since fossil energy are limited
and their large-scale use as fuels has a negative impact on global climate, thus fuel
alternative resources for energy productions are required [3]. Zhang et al. [4] have shown
that renewable energy is recognized as the next generation that will replace human
dependency on fossil fuels.
Nowadays, bioethanol has been produced from agricultural feedstock and lignocellulosic
biomass in many countries [5]. Biomass based on sugar and starch, such as sugarcane or corn,
is regarded as food and feedstock [6]. In this respect, research has now shifted to using
nonedible feedstock like lignocellulosic biomass or algal biomass rather than the firstgeneration carbohydrates rich food crops due to human food security risks associated with
the first-generation biofuels [7]. Availability of lignocellulosic materials is opening the
potential for different geographic regions to take advantage of locally abundant cellulosic
feedstock for ethanol production [8].
The use of wastewater as a source of reclaimed water and key nutrients for
growing energy crops would significantly reduce the cost and energy requirement
for biofuel production [2]. Aquatic plants represented by submerged, emerged, and
free-floating species colonized contaminated wetlands have attracted significant attention as a potential feedstock for second and third generation biofuels because of their
ability to produce a large amount of biomass as well as cheap and easy maintenance
and harvesting [9].
In the current study, Azolla plant was sampled for ethanol production with the aim
of ethanol production from Azolla filiculoides by using four different types of yeasts
for fermentation. Azolla is a genus of floating aquatic ferns with seven species,
distributed throughout tropical and temperate regions [10]. The most remarkable
characteristic of Azolla is its symbiotic relationship with the nitrogen-fixing bluegreen alga (cyanobacterium), Anabaena azollae [11]. The ability of Azolla to fix
atmospheric nitrogen allows this fern to grow successfully in aquatic habitats lacking
or having low levels of nitrogen. Azolla is one of the fastest growing plants, and it
has ability to adapt with wide range of environmental conditions [12]. Azolla is a
good example of a plant being a crop in the right place when cultivated for a certain
purposes, and it is considered as nuisance weed in some part of the world [13]. In
tropical and temperate regions, Azolla species may form thick mats on the relatively
placid surface of freshwater ponds, drainage ditches, and rice paddies [14]. Dense
Azolla mats prevent light penetration in open water areas, which causes oxygen
deficiency in the waters and poor life conditions for fish [15]. Hossain et al. [16]
show that the aquatic species like water hyacinth and Azolla can be good cellulosic
biomass and can be efficient in releasing sugars in their hydrolysate by cost-efficient
treatments for ethanol production .

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Material and Methods
Raw Materials
Azolla filiculoides was harvested from Magadu fish farm at Mororgoro region in
Tanzania. The weed was dried with sunlight for 1 week and powdered to particle
size of less than 100 μm using a roller mill and then sieved with 200-mesh and used
for analysis.
The biomass composition was determined by using AOAC method [17] by the Agriculture
Science Research Institute under Feed Certification Center at Chungnam National University
in Daejeon 34134, Republic of Korea.

Thermal Acid Hydrolysis
Three types of acids (HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4) at different concentrations from 50 to 250 mM
were used for slurry content ranging 6 to 16% (w/v) using 100-mL working volume in a
250-mL flask. The mixture autoclaved for different time intervals between 15 and 90 min at
121 °C then neutralized by NaOH to pH 5.0. The efficiency of thermal acid hydrolysis was
calculated using Eq. (1) as follows:
E P ð%Þ ¼

ΔS mono ðg=LÞ
 100
TC ðg=LÞ

ð1Þ

where Ep is the efficiency of the pretreatment (%), ΔSmono is the increase in xylose and glucose
(g/L) during the thermal acid hydrolysis, and TC is the total carbohydrate concentration (g/L)
of the Azolla weed [18].

Optimization of Enzymatic Saccharification
Three types of enzymes Celluclast, Viscozyme, and Cellic C-Tec2 were used to
determine the optimal enzyme for saccharification. The Viscozyme (Novozymes,
Bagsvaerd, Denmark) was added at different level from 4 to 20 U/mL in 100-mL
working volume in a 250-mL flask, then the reaction was performed at 50 °C on a
shaking incubator at 150 rpm. Samples of 1 mL were taken periodically from 0 to
72 h and analyzed to assess the degree of enzymatic saccharification. The concentrations of monosaccharides (xylose and glucose) were analyzed using high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC).
The enzymatic saccharification efficiency was calculated using Eq. (2)
E s ð%Þ ¼

ΔS g ðg=LÞ
 100
TF ðg=LÞ

ð2Þ

where Es is efficiency of enzymatic saccharification (%), ΔSg is increase in monosaccharide
concentration (g/L) during enzymatic saccharification after the pretreatment, TF is cellulose
content (g/L) in pretreated A. filiculoides [19].

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Fermentation
Yeast Culture and Adaptation
Saccharomyces cerevisiae KCCM 1129 was obtained from the Korean Culture Centre of
Microorganisms (KCCM, Seoul, Korea), Kluyveromyces marxianus KCTC 7150, Candida
lusitaniae, and Pichia stipitis KCTC 17574 were obtained from the Korean Collection for
Type Cultures (KCTC, Daejeon, Korea). These yeasts were grown in YPD medium containing
10-g/L yeast extract, 20-g/L peptone, and 20-g/L glucose as a seed culture. The culture was
incubated with agitation at 150 rpm for 24 h at 30 °C. Each cultured yeast strains were sampled
to determine the dry cell weight through the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) using the
standard curves of dry cell weight and OD600.

Ethanol Fermentation
Four yeasts (S. cerevisiae, K. marxianus, K. lusitaniae, and P. stipitis) were used for ethanol
production during fermentation process. Ethanol fermentation was performed with 100 mL of
Azolla weed hydrolysate in a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask under semianaerobic conditions. The
Azolla weed hydrolysates were fermented at 30 °C and 150 rpm and then samples were
collected periodically from 0 to 72 h for determination of ethanol and residual sugars stored at
− 20 °C prior to analysis. The ethanol concentration was determined by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). The ethanol yield coefficient (YEtOH) was calculated using Eq.
(3) as follows:
YEtOH ¼

½EtOHmax
½MSini

ð3Þ

where YEtOH represents the ethanol yield coefficient (g/g), [EtOH]max is the maximum ethanol
concentration achieved during fermentation (g/L), and [MS]ini is the total initial monosaccharides (xylose + glucose) concentration at the onset of fermentation (g/L) [20].

Analytical Methods
The composition of Azolla weed residue was analyzed using the AOAC method.
Cell growth was analyzed by measuring the OD600 via spectrophotometry and was converted to dry cell weight using a standard curve. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm
for 15 min, and the supernatants were used to determine the concentrations of glucose, xylose,
and ethanol after filtration through a 0.22-μm syringe filter. The concentrations of glucose,
xylose, and ethanol were analyzed by HPLC (Agilent 110 series; Agilent Inc., Santa Clara,
CA, USA) with a Bio-Rad Aminex HPX-87H column (300 mm × 7.8 mm; Bio-Rad) using
filtered and degassed 5 mM H2SO4 as an eluent at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min and a temperature
of 65 °C.

Statistical Analysis
Each experiment was carried out in triplicate. The statistical significances of differences in
pretreatment, saccharification, and monosaccharide contents were evaluated using a one-way

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Duncan’s multiple range test (P < 0.05) in SPSS version
23 (SPSS, Cary, NC, USA).

Results and Discussion
Composition of Azolla filiculoides
The biomass composition of Azolla weed was determined by using the AOAC method. It is
known that these species contain different levels and compositions of essential metabolites,
including proteins, starch, and crude fat, as well as cell-wall components including cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin [21]. Zouhair et al. [22] also reported that carbohydrates were the
major substrates for bioethanol production. The total carbohydrate content of the Azolla
filiculoides used in this research was 47.7% obtained by adding carbohydrate and fiber
contents as shown in Table 1. Cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin contents are composed of
11.3%, 14.0%, and 28.9%, respectively. The contents of fiber and carbohydrate are higher than
those of Miranda et al. [2]. The difference is due to maturity level which is influenced by
seasonal changes in temperature and solar radiation [23].

Optimization of Pretreatment Methods of Azolla Weed
Thermal Acid Hydrolysis of Azolla filiculoides
Saha et al. [24] confirmed that pretreatment of any lignocellulosic biomass is crucial before
enzymatic saccharification. Figure 1 shows monosaccharides concentration increased with
increase in slurry content from 6 to 14% (w/v). Lu et al. [25] also stated that high solid contents
of slurry produce high monosaccharide contents by the conversion of polysaccharide to
monosaccharide. The efficiency of pretreatment (Ep) of 5.1% was obtained using 14% (w/v)
Azolla weed and 100 mM H2SO4 for 30 min. Beyond 14% (w/v), the efficiency dropped to
4.9% were there was not any significant change in monosaccharide contents, thus, 14% (w/v)
was selected as the optimum slurry content. Beyond 14% (w/v), the viscosity was too high to
work with the medium. Rosgaard et al. [26] confirms that proper solid contents should be
applied during pretreatment.
Figure 2a shows the increase in monosaccharide concentration after thermal acid hydrolysis
for 30 min at 121 °C using HCl with concentrations ranging from 50 to 250 mM. Previous
research shows high acid concentrations produced high monosaccharide content. The lowest
monosaccharide concentration was 0.7 g/L with efficiency of 1% obtained using 50 mM HCl,
and the highest monosaccharide concentrations was 4.2 g/L with efficiency of 6.3% reached
using 200 mM HCl. Beyond 200 mM, there was no significant difference in monosaccharide
concentration; hence, 200 mM was selected as optimal HCl concentration.
Table 1 Composition analysis of Azolla filiculoides
Weed form

Moisture

Ash

Fat

Protein

Unit: (%)
Carbohydrate

Dry Azolla weed

0.85

26.20

2.21

23.02

47.72

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Fig. 1 Optimization of slurry contents of Azolla filiculoides for thermal acid hydrolysis (100 mM H2SO4 at
121 °C for 30 min) were evaluated using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)

Figure 2b shows the increase in monosaccharide concentration after thermal acid hydrolysis
for 30 min at 121 °C using HNO3 with concentrations ranging from 50 to 250 mM. The lowest
monosaccharide concentration was 1.3 g/L with efficiency of 2% obtained using 50 mM
HNO3 and the highest monosaccharide concentrations was 8.9 g/L with efficiency of 13.3%
reached using 200 mM HNO3. Beyond 200 mM, there was no significant difference in
monosaccharide concentration; hence, 200 mM was selected as optimal HNO3 concentration.
Dziekońska-Kubczak et al. [27] showed the same result to this study. The pretreatment
efficiency of HNO3 is higher compared with that of HCl.
Figure 2c shows the increase in monosaccharide concentration after thermal acid hydrolysis
for 30 min at 121 °C using H2SO4 with concentrations ranging from 50 to 250 mM. High
hydrolysis yields have been reported when pretreating lignocellulosic materials with H2SO4
[28]. The chemical hydrolysis of biomass with dilute sulfuric acid has been recognized by
other study [29] as a critical step for removing hemicelluloses from lignocellulosic substrates
to facilitate the biological conversion of cellulosic biomass to ethanol. The lowest monosaccharide concentration obtained was 1.4 g/L with efficiency of 2% using 50 mM H2SO4 and
highest concentration was 11.8 g/L with efficiency of 17.7% using 200 mM H2SO4. High acid
concentrations showed high monosaccharide content as reported by Chiaramonti et al. [30].
Figure 3 shows thermal acid hydrolysis using different acid hydrolysis time. Monosaccharides concentrations increased with increasing acid hydrolysis time from 15 to 60 min. Beyond
60 min, there was no significant change in monosaccharides concentration. Kityo et al. [31]
reported 60 min as optimal hydrolysis time and no significant difference of monosaccharides
beyond 60 min. Monosaccharides was increased to 6.9 g/L with efficiency of 10.3% from
15 min to 16.9 g/L with efficiency of 25.3% from 60 min and beyond 60 min monosaccharides
dropped to 16.2 g/L monosaccharides with efficiency of 24.3%. Therefore, 60 min was
selected as optimal acid hydrolysis time. If the reaction time is longer than 60 min, xylose
concentration decreases due to the degradation of xylose according to Chiaramonti et al. [30].

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Fig. 2 Thermal acid hydrolysis of Azolla filiculoides at 121 °C for 30 min with different Concentrations of a
HCl, b HNO3, and c H2SO4 were evaluated using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Fig. 3 Thermal acid hydrolysis of Azolla filiculoides using different hydrolysis times (200 mM H2SO4 at 121 °C
for 15 min to 90 min) were evaluated using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)

Figure 4 shows the increase in monosaccharides concentration using optimal hydrolysis
time (60 min) at 121 °C and H2SO4 acid with concentrations ranging from 50 to 250 mM.
Monosaccharides were increased with increasing acid concentrations from 50 to 200 mM.
Beyond 200 mM of acid concentration, there was no significant difference in monosaccharides

Fig. 4 Thermal acid hydrolysis of Azolla filiculoides using different concentrations of H2SO4 from 50 to 250 mM
at 121 °C for 60 min were evaluated using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

concentration. Lu et al. [25] reported that an increase in acid concentration produce a high
yield of monosaccharides. Difference was observed when Azolla slurry was treated at 121 °C
for 30 min as shown in Fig. 1d and 60 min as shown in Fig. 2b. There was an increase of
monosaccharides concentration of 4.9 g/L from 11.8 g/L when slurry contents autoclaved for
30 min to 16.7 g/L when slurry contents autoclaved for 60 min. Therefore, 200 mM H2SO4
was selected as the optimum acid concentration producing high monosaccharides concentration of 16.7 g/L with 25% efficiency. Kityo et al. [31] reported 200 mM of HNO3 as optimal
acid concentration which produced high monosaccharides concentration.

Enzymatic Saccharification
Figure 5a shows monosaccharide concentrations using 8 U/mL of Viscozyme, Celluclast, and
Cellic C-Tec2 enzymes for 72 h. Viscozyme produces high monosaccharides of 35.8 g/L with
efficiency of 53.6% followed by Celluclast 32.9 g/L with efficiency of 49.3% and last Cellic

Fig. 5 Enzymatic saccharification of acid hydrolyzed Azolla filiculoides. a Monosaccharides production using
8 U/mL of Celluclast, Viscozyme and Cellic C-Tec2 with treatment time using Azolla filiculoides. b Monosaccharides production from Azolla filiculoides using various units of Viscozyme were evaluated using a one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA)

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

C-Tec2 28.9 g/L with efficiency of 43.3%. The enzymes show high concentrations of
monosaccharides at 48 h after that no further increase of monosaccharides. In this study,
Viscozyme showed high monosaccharide content compared with Celluclast and Cellic CTec2, thus, Viscozyme was selected as the optimum enzyme for enzymatic saccharification.
Deba et al. [32] showed that Viscozyme contains various enzymatic activities including
cellulase and hemicellulase.
Figure 5b monosaccharide concentrations using various units of Viscozyme enzyme from 4
to 20 U/mL. In this study 16 U/mL, was selected as the optimum unit of Viscozyme for
enzymatic saccharification because it produces high monosaccharides contents of 61.6 g/L
with efficiency of 92.2% while 4 U/mL produces the lowest monosaccharides contents of
13.2 g/L with efficiency of 19.8%. Beyond 16 U/mL, there was not a significant increase in
monosaccharides concentration. Saha et al. [33] shows that various pretreatment options can
be used to hydrolyze a fiber to monosaccharides increasing amount of fermentable sugars to
produce more ethanol.

Fermentation with K. marxianus, C. lusitaniae, P. stipitis, and S. cerevisiae
Fermentation with 4 yeasts; S. cerevisiae, K. marxianus, K. lusitaniae, and P. stipitis after
thermal acid hydrolysis and enzymatic saccharification produces ethanol as shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6 Bioethanol production from Azolla filiculoides hydrolyzate using four yeasts. a S. cerevisiae, b P. stipitis,
c C. lusitaniae, and d K. marxianus

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology

Figure 6a shows ethanol production by using S. cerevisiae. In this study, xylose could not
be utilized by S. cerevisiae. Same results reported by Limtong et al. [34] mentioning pentose
sugar cannot be fermented by S. cerevisiae. Glucose of 27.8 g/L was fully utilized after 48 h to
produce ethanol while 33.2 g/L of xylose remained unused. It has been reported by several
other researches that ethanol can be produced from xylose by genetically engineered
S. cerevisiae [33–36]. S. cerevisiae had the lowest yield of 13.7 g/L ethanol with YEtOH =
0.22 consumed glucose only but not xylose.
Figure 6b shows that glucose was fully utilized within 36 h and xylose was utilized 12.6 g/
L in 60 h producing 18.2 g/L ethanol with YEtOH = 0.29. It is known that P. stipitis is able to
consume xylose to produce ethanol despite of preference of glucose to xylose [37]. Glucose
inhibits xylose transport by noncompetitive inhibition in the low-affinity proton symport
system, where the low-affinity transport is used when sugar concentrations are high and the
high affinity systems are used when sugar concentrations are low [38]. Maleszka et al. [39]
reported that C. lusitaniae produces more ethanol than P. stipitis simply because it able to
ferment xylose better.
Figure 6c shows how glucose was fully utilized by C. lusitaniae in 36 h, however
xylose was not completely utilized after 60 h. Previous study indicates that xylose can be
consumed completely in 48 h by adaptive evolution process [36]. C. lusitaniae was the
second yeast to produce 23.2 g/L ethanol with YEtOH = 0.37 as it consumed glucose
completely and 23.7 g/L xylose.
Figure 6d shows high utilization of monosaccharides by K. marxianus from 27.8 g/L of
glucose and 33.2 g/L of xylose yielding high ethanol of 26.8 g/L with YEtOH = 0.43
compared with other three yeasts. It shows that glucose was fully utilized after 36 h while
xylose was completely utilized after 60 h. Sunwoo et al. [17] reported that K. marxianus
can consume both glucose and xylose although observed to utilize xylose after glucose is
depleted. It has been reported that K. marxianus can grow at 47 °C, 49 °C, and even 52 °C
and can produce ethanol even at higher temperatures above 40 °C [35, 36]. Also,
K. marxianus offers additional benefits including a high growth rate and the ability to
utilize a wide variety of industrially relevant substrates such as sugarcane, corn silage
juice, molasses, and whey powder [35].

Conclusion
Azolla weed is one of the fastest growing plants on the earth, and it is considered as nuisance
in some part of the world. This makes Azolla as a perfect biomass for bioethanol production.
Thermal acid hydrolysis and enzymatic saccharification enhanced ethanol production from
Azolla hydrolysate by converting cellulose to more fermentable sugar. This study confirms the
production of ethanol from Azolla filiculoides by using four different types of yeasts, and all of
them utilize the mixture of glucose and xylose except for S. cerevisiae which utilize only
glucose. The optimal pretreatment conditions for the production of monosaccharides from
Azolla weed were thermal acid hydrolysis with 200 mM H2SO4 with 14% (w/v) slurry at
121 °C for 60 min. The optimal condition for enzymatic saccharification was the treatment of
16 U/mL Viscozyme. The maximum ethanol concentration produced from Azolla filiculoides
hydrolysate was 26.8 g/L with YEtOH = 0.43 by using K. marxianus followed by C. lusitaniae
with 23.2 g/L with YEtOH = 0.37 then P. stipitis and S. cerevisiae having the lowest ethanol
production of 18.2 g/L with YEtOH = 0.29 and 13.7 g/L with YEtOH = 0.22.

Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology
Funding This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Education (2019R1F1A1041288), Republic of Korea.

Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.