Penicillin: Biosynthesis, Structure, Fermentation Process and Uses
(https://www.biotechnologynotes.com/antibiotics/penicillin/penicillin-biosynthesis-structurefermentation-process-and-uses/13843)

I. Introduction to Penicillin:
Chemically the natural penicillin is 6-amino penicillanic acid (6 – APA), which
consists of thiazolidine ring with a condensed β-lactam ring. The various
penicillins differ primarily in the nature of R-side chain which are attached by
an amido linkage to the chemical nucleus of the molecule. Fleming’s original
Penicillium notatum strain, when grown on his medium produced penicillin-F,
which is known as 2-pentinyl penicillin.
Subsequently P. chrysogenum proved to be better fungus and more suitable for
submerged fermentation. The basic structure of penicillin and different types
of natural penicillin’s differing in the composition of side chain are shown in
Fig. 6.2.

If penicillin fermentation is carried out without the addition of side chain
precursor, the natural penicillins are formed from which only benzyl penicillin
can be isolated. However, the desired penicillin can be obtained by adding
suitable side chain precursor into the medium. Such penicillins are called as
semi-synthetic penicillins.
Penicillin-G and Penicillin-V are generally produced commercially. When
compared to natural penicillins, semisynthetic penicillins have improved
characters viz, acid stability, resistance to plasmid or chromosomally coded βlactamases, expanded antimicrobial effectiveness and are therefore,
extensively used in therapy.
II.

Biosynthesis of Penicillin:

The β-lactam thiazolidine ring of penicillin is formed by the condensation of
L-cystine and L-valine. The biosynthesis occurs in a non-ribosomal process by
means of dipeptide composed of (α – α – AAA) and α-cystine or a breakdown
product of cystothiamine. Subsequently L-valine is connected via
epimerization reaction resulting in the formation of tripeptide. The first product
of cyclization of the tripeptide which can be isolated is isopenicillin N but the
biochemical reactions leading to this intermediate is not understood. Benzyl
penicillin is produced in exchange of α -α-AAA with activated phenylacetic
acid (Fig. 6.3).

About 38% of the penicillins produced commercially are used as human
medicine, 12% in veterinary medicine and 43% as starting materials for the
production of semi-synthetic penicillins.
III. Structure of Penicillin:
Some of such semisynthetic penicillins along with structure and biological
activity are presented in table 6.4 and Fig. 6.4.

Hetacillin, bacampicillin, epicillin, pivampicillin, and talampicillin are
converted to ampicillin in the body. These penicillins exhibit various
improvements including resistance to stomach acids to allow oral
administration, to pencillinase and an extended range of activity against gram
(+) positive bacteria.
It has been reported that most of the high yielding strains of P. chrysogenum
are genetically unstable. Genetic unstability increases with the increase in the
yield. However, it can be controlled to some extent by following suitable
preservation methods. The following preservation methods are generally
adopted for storing high yielding strains of P. chrysogenum.
1. A spore suspension is stored in a frozen state under liquid nitrogen.
2. A spore suspension can be lyophilized in an appropriate medium.

3. A spore suspension is mixed with a sterile finely divided inert material
like soil or sand and desiccated.
IV. Fermentation Process of Penicillin:
Penicillin fermentation is an aerobic process with a volumetric oxygen
absorption rate of 0.4 -0.8mm min-1. The required aeration rate varies according
to the strain, the type of fermenter used and on the impellor system. However,
the aeration rate varies between 0.5 and 1.0 vvm. It is produced by fed batch
submerged fermentation in a stirred tank fermenter.
This process can be described under following headings:
1. Strain development,
2. Inoculum production,
3. Inoculation and penicillin production
4. Extraction and purification
IV.1. Strain Development:
The variety of molds which yield greater amount of penicillin is called
as high yielding strain. They are generally developed from the wild P.
chrysogenum by a process called sequential genetic selection. This
process consists of stepwise development of improved mutant by treating
the wild strain of P. chrysogenum with a series of mutagenic agents or
exposing to ultraviolet radiation either individually or in combination,
such as X-rays and chemical mutagens, is called as strain improvement.
Strain development is a laborious and time-consuming process. The
selected mutant possesses greater capacity for antibiotic production than
the wild type.

The expanded role for penicillins came from the discovery that different
biosynthetic penicillins can be formed by the addition of side chain precursors
to the fermentation medium and that natural penicillins can be modified
chemically to produce penicillins with improved characteristics. Most
penicillins are now semisynthetic produced by chemical modification of
natural penicillin obtained by fermentation using strains of P chrysogenum.
Modification is achieved by removing their natural acyl group, leaving 6 APA
to which other acyl groups can be added to confer new properties. This is
achieved by passage through a column of immobilized penicillin acylase
usually obtained from E.coli at neutral pH. Penicillin G for example converted
to 6-APA and phenylacetic acid. The 6-APA is then ethically acylated with an
appropriate side chain to produce a semi-synthetic penicillin.
IV.2. Inoculum Production:

The microorganism which is used in a fermentation process is called as the
inoculum. A high yielding strain of P. chrysogenum is generally employed as
inoculum.
A strain of the fungus is sub-cultured from stock culture for inoculum
development. Spores from primary source are suspended in water or in a dilute
solution of a nontoxic wetting agent such as 1:10000 sodium lauryl sulfate.
The spores are then added to flasks or bottles of wheat bran plus nutrient
solution and these are incubated for five to seven days at 24°C so as to provide
heavy sporulation. The entire process is repeated several times in order to have
more sporulation.
The resulting spores are used directly to inoculate inoculum tanks or stirred
fermenters. The incubation temperature is maintained at 24-27°C for 2 days
with agitation and aeration in order to facilitate heavy mycelial growth, which
may be added to a second or even a third stage fermentation.
The resulting inoculum which is employed in a production tank is tested both
by microscopic examination and by sub-culturing method. Many sporulation
media have been designed to obtain large number of spores. The one developed
by Moyer and Coghill (1946) is most extensively used and given below (table
6.5).

IV.3. Inoculation and penicillin production:
Introduction of pure inoculum into the production tanks or fermenters is called
as inoculation.
This is done by any one of the following three methods:
1. Dry Spores may be used as Inoculum:
Since the spores of P. chrysogenum are hydrophobic, either spores are blown
deep into the medium or a wetting agent such as sodium lauryl sulphate is
used.
2. Suspension of Ungerminated Spores:
This suspension is made by using 1:10000 sodium lauryl sulfate solution. This
suspension is fed to the fermenter by suitable techniques like spray guns or
pipettes. This is followed by agitation and aeration of the fermentation medium
in order to achieve equal and uniform distribution of the spores in the entire
medium.
3. Feeding the fermentation tanks with pre-germinated spores or mycelial
pellets which are prepared by the germination of spores. Pellets are generally
fed to the fermentation medium after two or three days of spore inoculation.
Fermenters with a capacity of 40,000 to 200,000 liters are generally
employed for the production of penicillin. Due to difficulties with the
oxygen supply larger tanks are not employed. Some manufacturer’s use
of Waldh of fermenters or air lift fermenters, but this is only possible in
mutants which generate low viscosity. Depending upon the production
strain, the operational temperature is maintained between 25°-27°C. A
typical flow chart for penicillin production is given in Fig. 6.5.

Medium for penicillin production:
The medium employed for penicillin production should be suitable to
achieve:
1. An abundant growth of the mycelium.
2. Maximum accumulation of the antibiotic.
3. Easy and inexpensive extraction and purification of the antibiotic.
Carbon source is generally supplied in the form of lactose. Glucose, sucrose,
glycerol and sorbitol can also be employed as carbon source. Nitrogen source
is generally supplied in the form of ammonium sulphate or ammonium acetate
or ammonium nitrate. Abundant formation of mycelium and spores takes place
when a medium contains corn-steep liquor because it contains important amino
acids required for mycelial growth.
Potassium, phosphorus, magnesium, sulphur, zinc and copper are supplied in
the form of salts. Potassium and phosphorus are supplied in the form of
potassium dihydrogen phosphate, magnesium, iron and copper are supplied in
the form of sulphates. All these elements may be present in corn steep liquor.

Penicillin-F and penicillin-K are the naturally produced penicillins synthesized
by P. notatum and P. chrysogenum, respectively, in the absence of precursor.
But, if phenylacetic acid is supplied in the medium P. chrysogenum produces
penicillin-G instead of penicillin-K. Similarly, desired synthetic penicillins can
be obtained by adding the medium with suitable precursor.
A medium designed by Jackson (1958) which has the following composition,
is generally used in fermentative production of penicillin (table 6.6).

Penicillin yields with time are linear from approximately 48 to 96 hours. The
final penicillin yield is in the range of 3 to 5% which largely depends upon the
amount of carbohydrate consumed during fermentation process, which is
approximately equal to 1500 international units per milliliter. Sylvester and
Coghill (1954) have estimated that to produce 1000 gallons of fermented
culture, which is capable of yielding 2.2-2.7 kg of penicillin by the submerged
culture method requires approximately 227 kg of nutrients, 3400 kg of steam,
45460 lt of water, 1000 kWh of electricity and 7075 m3 of air.
Penicillin easily get carboxylated to form penicillianic acid which is
biologically inactive by the action of enzyme penicillinase. The enzyme
penicillinase is widely distributed among different microorganisms. These
organisms may enter into the fermenter at any stage and may convert penicillin
into penicillianic acid (Fig. 6.6).

Thus, in penicillin fermentation contamination is a main constraint. Hence, one
has to be careful in preventing contamination. This was the one of the main
problems during early times of penicillin production, when fermentation was
carried out in bottles and contamination in one bottle may destroy penicillin in
entire batch of bottles.
In the typical penicillin fermentation there is a growth of 10 hrs duration with
a doubling time of 6 hrs during which the greater part of the cell mass is
formed. The oxygen supply in the growing culture is critical since the
increasing viscosity hinders oxygen transfer. After growth phase, the culture
proceeds to actual penicillin production. The growth is sharply reduced by
feeding with various culture medium components.
The production phase can be extended to 120- 180 hrs. Penicillin production
by continuous fermentation has been attempted but it has been difficult due to
instability of the production strains. A batch fill and draw system has been
suggested as an alternative. In this process 20-40% of the fermentation contents
is drawn off and replaced with fresh nutrient solution. This process may be
repeated up to 10 without affecting yield.
IV.4. Extraction and Purification:
After it is assessed that sufficient amount of penicillin has been produced
during fermentation process, it is extracted and then purified.

The entire process is carried out in three different stages.
They are:
(a) Separation of mycelium
(b) Extraction of penicillin and
(c) Treatment of crude extract
(a) Separation of mycelium:
Mycelium is separated from the medium by employing rotatory vacuum filter.
This process should be performed carefully in order to avoid contaminating
microorganisms which produce penicillinase enzyme, degrading the
penicillin.
(b) Extraction of Penicillin:
The penicillin is excreted into the medium and less than 1% remains as
mycelium bound. Extraction of penicillin is carried out by employing counter
current extraction method. The pH of the liquid after separation of the
mycelium is adjusted to 2.0 to 2.5 by adding phosphoric or sulphuric acid. This
treatment converts penicillin into anionic form.
The liquid is immediately extracted with an organic solvent such as
amylacetate or butylacetate or methyl isobutyl ketone. This step has to be
carried out quickly because penicillin is quite unstable at low pH values.
Podbielniak counter current extractor is used for this purpose. The penicillin is
then back extracted into water from the organic solvent by adding enough
potassium or sodium hydroxide which also results in the elevation of pH to 7.0
to 7.5.
The resulting aqueous solution is again acidified and re-extracted with organic
solvent. These shifts between the water and the solvent help in the purification
of the penicillin. Finally, the penicillin is obtained in the form of sodium
penicillin. The spent solvent is recovered by distillation for reuse.
(c) Treatment of Crude Extract:

The resulted sodium penicillin is treated with charcoal to remove pyrogens
(fever causing substances). It is also, sometimes, sterilized to remove bacteria
by using Seitz filter. Then, the sodium penicillin is prepared in crystalline form
by crystallization. It may be packed as powder in sterile vials or prepared in
the form of tablets or in the form of syrups for oral usage. The pharmaceutical
grade may be used in the production of semi synthetic penicillin.
V. Uses of Penicillin:
1. Most of the penicillin’s are active against Gram-positive bacteria, in which
they inhibit the cell wall synthesis leading to the death of bacteria.
2. Used therapeutically in the treatment of infectious diseases of humans
caused by Gram (+) positive bacteria.

